Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Technology Manager of
Development Tools,
Godfrey DiGiorgi.
Good afternoon.
It's very good to see you all here again.
Have a nice full house.
I hope you've been having a great show.
Fantastic.
Applause.
In this session,
we're going to show you probably what's
considered the third major portion
of our Development Tools package.
Number one,
the integrated development environment,
which we showed you yesterday.
Number two, the interface design program,
Interface Builder,
which was in the session
just preceding this.
And in this session,
the package of performance
tools that we supply.
And to do that,
I'm going to introduce Robert Bowdidge,
the engineer for Performance Tools.
Thank you, Godfrey.
Okay.
So, before we start off,
let's come down to the point
of exactly why you're here.
And we all know you're here because
you want to learn about the tools.
But why are you doing that?
Well, the first reason that you want to
learn about the tools or why you
should care about them is that
performance should actually be a
selling point for your applications.
If you have an application
that's slower than a competitor's
but has the same features,
that forces users to work
slower or doesn't allow them
to work with as big a data set,
people are going to go
over to other applications.
And so you want to make
sure your application is
performing as good as it is,
or as it possibly can.
Secondly, most of the performance
problems you're going to run
into are going to be invisible.
Apart from a few really egregious bugs,
you're probably not going to notice
that your application is using
much more memory than it should.
And until you actually start diving
in with the performance tools,
you might not even notice that
you have performance problems.
And so you need to care about this,
even if you don't think there's an issue.
The third one, which may not be a reason
that you actually came here,
is that your application
is not the entire world.
If you're anything like me,
When your application is running,
when customers are using it,
they're not just going to
be using your application.
What else are they going to be running?
Okay, I think I know who's in
the front audience here.
OmniWeb.
They're going to be running, well,
maybe they'll be running
Internet Explorer,
though I hope not.
Maybe they're going to be running Mail.
Maybe they're going to be...
Maybe they're going to be playing iTunes.
They're certainly going
to be playing iTunes.
And the problem is that your application
is going to have to fight with all
of those applications for memory use.
And so you can't just judge how good your
app is by how it's performing on its own,
but you need to make sure
it's as lean as possible,
that it's using as little
memory as possible,
that it's as efficient
with the CPU as possible,
so that when I'm listening to iTunes,
my music doesn't skip.
This is very important, at least to me.
So how do you find these
performance problems?
How do you actually find
out that there's a problem?
And that's what I'm here
to tell you about today.
What you're going to learn is that
Apple does have tools that will help you.
It has tools--we at Apple actually
have tools that will help you
identify that you may have a
performance problem and will help
you track down exactly what that is.
I'm going to go through some
very quick examples of how you
might use some of these tools.
The tools that you're going to see,
first from me,
are going to be the tools that
are on the Developer Tools CD.
After that,
we're going to have some folks from the
hardware group tell you about some tools
for doing even lower-level analysis,
for getting information from the
PowerPC's performance register
so that you can actually optimize
every little bit of performance
out of your application.
These are tools that are
available for download.
So these are all tools
that you can go off
There's a couple things
you're not going to hear here.
First of all, you're not going to get
a lot of details on,
well, if you use this API,
you'll be in much better shape
than if you use that API.
If you want that information,
you need to go to the framework talks.
You should have been
going to them all week.
And they can give you
those sorts of details.
Secondly,
this is just going to be a teaser.
I'm not going to give you tutorials.
You're probably not going to get enough
information here to really become
experts at the performance tools.
But hopefully you'll know that they
exist and you'll have a chance to
understand how they might work so that
you can try using them on your own.
Hopefully some of you will actually
be doing that as we go along today.
So what are some of the
causes of poor performance?
Well, one case is you have to
worry about memory use.
Your application may be using
more memory than it should.
You could be executing too much code,
either the wrong code or code
that turns out to be more
expensive than it needs to be.
You might be waiting for other devices.
You may be waiting for the
disk to come back with events.
You may be trying to draw and
talking with the Windows server,
which is actually a separate process,
which actually does the drawing.
And one of the key issues on any
system that has virtual memory is
that pretty much all of these problems
eventually become memory problems.
Because the code that you execute is
going to try to sit in physical memory.
When you do drawing,
you're going to be using physical memory.
When you allocate memory,
you're certainly using physical memory.
And as a result, the
When you use too much,
when you get to the point where you don't
actually have enough RAM in your system,
you're going to get to the point
where the operating system is
trying to be very nice to you.
And what it'll do is
what's called paging.
It'll take some of those
blocks out of memory and it'll
throw them out onto the disk.
It'll write them out onto disk
and bring something else in
that needs to be done right now.
And when your application
needs that memory again,
it'll go back off to disk,
copy your stuff in,
copy whatever else is out there.
And as a result,
as soon as your application
starts swapping,
as soon as it needs to page,
your application will start
running at the speed of the disk,
not at the speed of memory.
Because to get that memory that
you carefully placed in RAM,
you're actually going to have to go
off and do several disk accesses.
So you want to minimize memory
use in all possible ways.
So there's a number of tools available.
Here I've divided them
into two categories.
First,
the tools that are used for monitoring,
for understanding that
you may have a problem,
and the tools for doing deep analysis.
And what I'm going to do is,
for this talk,
go through a few of the tools in
each of the categories in terms
of understanding memory use,
in terms of understanding
execution behavior,
in terms of understanding resource use.
Now, to do a good performance talk,
we need a victim.
We need some program to analyze to
actually look for performance problems.
And this year,
we are using a program called SimPhysics.
And this is actually a project
that was written by one of the
people in our Developer Tools group,
Scott Tooker.
And I'd like to bring Scott up on stage
right now to actually demonstrate this.
The two things to remember
as you see this demo is that,
first of all,
this is a relatively realistic example.
This is a program that shows
you electric field interactions.
It was intended to teach
students on physics.
Can we actually switch
to the demo machine?
Yes, please demo.
Thank you.
First of all,
this is a realistic example.
This is something that Scott actually
developed for classroom use.
And second, it was actually an app that
was ported from Java to Cocoa.
And so there's a number of
inefficiencies caused there.
Okay, so here's the view.
What you see here are three particles,
positively charged and
negatively charged in a normal,
or a neutral particle.
Scott can
Display the information about
these particles in several ways.
Here we're showing intensity
according to color.
The first, it also can show in terms of a
vector graph where you can see
at each point where the charge is
or which way the charge is going.
And one thing that we can see here is
that there may be a performance problem,
that as Scott drags that particle,
the redraw rate tends
to be relatively slow.
And so this may imply that we actually
have something that we need to deal with.
Okay.
Can we switch back to the slides, please?
Oh, and one other thing that
you should know about this.
This,
although this is a realistic example,
with some of the problems in
here are things that you might
actually find in your own code.
Not all the problems
are actually Scott's.
There were actually a number
that we actually salted into the
program to make a better demo.
So if you see anything
that looks really nasty,
it's probably my fault
because I put it in.
Okay.
So how do we actually
find performance problems?
Well, we found one, we had one way there.
We looked at SimPhysics,
we dragged and we said, gee,
that drawing rate seems a little slow.
So one way that you can track
down performance problems is just
notice things that are egregious,
that are just too ugly to live,
that you need to deal with.
But that's not the only way.
In fact,
what you probably need to do in order
to really do a good job of performance
analysis is you need to measure.
You need to actually
find out how much memory,
how your application needs,
how quickly it needs to redraw,
and so on,
so that you can at least compare.
So in the case of SimPhysics,
one of the things we did which was
not displayed there was we actually
kept track of the frame rate.
So we could see,
as Scott dragged a particle,
how many frames per second he could draw.
We could then write down that number and
actually compare before against after
and decide whether we did a good job.
Now, the normal way that I actually
prefer to do analysis,
though,
to at least find the nastier bugs,
is to use a command-line tool called Top.
Could we switch to the
demo machine again?
Okay, so here we have
Scott actually running TOP.
And this is a command line tool
that's available on the system.
The output from TOP can be
divided into two categories.
At the top is the information
that's about the system.
It tells us how many processors
are currently running,
how much of the CPU is
actually being used.
The most interesting line
I find here is the bottom line,
where we see the number
of page ins and page outs.
That represents the number of pages that
are having to be taken out of memory
and written to disk because other stuff
is needed to be put into that memory,
and the number of pages that are being
brought off of disk and into memory
because we need that memory again.
So this number gives you an idea
about how much paging you're doing.
The main number, such as the 4785,
represents the number of
pages that have been paged out
since the system was booted.
The number in parentheses represents the
number of pages per second that changed.
And so if you ever see that
number in parentheses ever go,
let's say, above 100 or 200 for an
extended period of time,
that usually implies that your
system is doing nothing but paging.
All it's doing is writing out pages and
then immediately doing some code which
causes another page to be brought in,
and all it's doing is writing pages
out to memory-- or out to disk and
bringing them in off of memory.
And that usually implies that
your application just plain
doesn't have enough memory for all
the things you're trying to do.
The second part about Top that's
interesting is the bottom part,
which is focused on
each individual process.
And we see here that there's a
column that shows the percentage
of CPU used by each process,
so we can see which ones
are particularly expensive.
The second column that's
interesting is the Rprivate,
two-thirds of the way over.
Rprivate stands for the amount
of resident private memory
used by that application.
Resident meaning it's
actually physically in memory,
so it gives you an idea about the
footprint of the application in memory.
And private because that memory is
only for use by that application.
It's not used by any other applications.
So we can see here that SymPhysics
currently is not doing anything,
so it's using 0.0 percent of the CPU.
That's very good.
We would prefer that SymPhysics is not
doing stuff while my iTunes is playing.
and we see that its private
memory is about 1.3 megabytes.
And Scott,
can you actually move something around
while you're--just so we see it active?
Actually,
do the vector graph if you could.
Okay.
Interesting.
So we can see here that the private
memory size is about two megabytes,
which seems a little high.
I mean, calculators shouldn't take more
than like about a megabyte,
so that seems a little odd.
The second thing we can
see is as we're redrawing,
we're actually pegging the CPU.
We're using 100 percent of the
CPU to actually do that drawing,
which implies that drawing
is pretty expensive.
Thank you.
Can we go back to slides?
Okay, so most important things,
look at the CPU usage for each process,
look at the swapping and paging rate,
look at our private and top.
Try to keep it open.
It's very interesting.
And as you heard,
our vice president actually
uses it on our applications,
so he must be seeing
something interesting.
Okay,
so we looked at SimPhysics there and
we saw that it was using about 2.2
megabytes of memory when it was running.
This seems a little high.
However, we didn't see if it was
growing or anything.
You may ask, well, you know,
was--did we have a leak?
Were we actually allocating an extra
100,000 bytes every minute or so?
And you couldn't really see that on top.
However, even though we don't quite
have a tool for doing that,
there's ways that you can do that.
Because a number of the performance tools
are actually Unix command-line tools,
and that is very advantageous because
that means that you can pretty much
roll your own little performance tools
as you need to for specific tasks.
For example,
if we wanted to see if SimPhysics
was actually leaking memory,
we could write a little script
that would get the output from top,
it would search for the
line for SimPhysics,
save that to a file,
and then do that every second.
And then we could look at that
file over time and see whether we
actually saw a change in memory use.
Now, these command-line tools
don't seem Mac-like.
They're very Unix-like.
They're very ugly.
You're dealing with text.
However,
they do have the advantage that you're
able to do customized data collection.
And these tools still work even
if you're running them remotely
from a terminal because you
don't want to upset the screen,
perhaps because you're developing a game,
or if your system is hung and the
Windows server won't respond and you're
trying to find out what's going on.
So command-line tools do have a
purpose in performance analysis.
So we think that sim physics
may have too much memory.
Why could that be?
Well,
one reason is that sim physics could
be allocating huge amounts of memory.
It could be allocating large structures.
A second possible concern
for applications is caching.
So let's think of a
hypothetical case here.
I have an application.
It wants to read a bunch
of data in off of disk.
So it reads the data in off of disk,
puts it in memory,
and then says this memory
is so important to me,
this information is so important,
that I don't want to have to read
it off of disk when I need it.
Instead, I'll read it at the start,
save it into memory,
and then when I actually need it,
I'll go to memory and get it,
because that'll be faster.
Sounds good, right?
So the problem is,
let's imagine that iTunes starts up,
or Internet Explorer, or OmniWeb,
or Mail,
and a bunch of those pages get chased
off to disk because that memory's needed
by one of the current applications.
So that memory you've carefully--that
data you've carefully put in memory
so that you didn't have to do a disk
read suddenly gets written out to disk.
And when you actually go to access it,
you need to go to the disk again.
And so to save a single disk
access close to the use,
you end up doing three disk
accesses over the--throughout
the lifetime of the application.
That's not very efficient.
So you want to make sure that
you're not out creating data,
loading it in,
and keeping it on hand just in case.
Try to cut your memory use by
getting rid of those caching cases.
The third case is that you
could be leaking memory.
You could be allocating it
and forgetting about it,
increasing your footprint.
As I said at the intro,
any of this excessive memory use
will eventually lead to the fact that
you're going to be doing disk accesses,
and it'll slow your application
and you don't want to do it.
So keep your memory as small as possible.
But how do you do that?
So the tool for doing that is
a tool called malloc-debug.
It's interest--actually,
there's two tools, I should say.
The first tool, malloc-debug,
allows you to look at allocations
according to where they were allocated,
where in your program.
The second program, called object-alloc,
treats--analyses memory by looking at how
many objects of each type were created.
And what I'll do is I'll look
at each of these in turn.
Okay.
First,
let's switch over to the demo screen.
Okay,
so Scott started up malloc-debug here,
and he will create a new window and
select the SimPhysics program as
the app that he wants to launch.
Okay, and he launches the program.
Now, what you can see in malloc-debug is,
first of all,
up in the upper right-hand corner,
we can see that we're using
about 1.6 megabytes of
Actually, go back a little.
Or actually, no, that's perfect.
Never mind.
So according to this,
SimPhysics is using about 1.6 megabytes
of memory that it allocated via malloc.
Malloc debug is only showing us the
memory that we're allocating on the heap.
The middle section of the window
here shows us a call tree.
It describes where in the
program we called malloc.
So in this case,
what we found is that 1.6
megabytes of that memory was
allocated in main and below,
in the things that are called from main.
Now,
because this is an Objective-C program,
main immediately calls the
function NSApplicationMain.
And NSApplicationMain
calls several functions,
each responsible for,
or each allocating some
memory below that point,
with most of the memory actually
allocated with NSApplicationRun.
So malloc debug is trying to help us look
at our program in terms of its structure,
in terms of what it calls.
Now,
this is really nice if you've written a
program with a functional decomposition.
That is, first you read in the data,
then you process the data,
then you print out the data,
then you close the data.
In that way, malloc debug will tell you
exactly how much memory is used
in each phase of your program.
Now,
SymPhysics is actually a Cocoa program.
And so the idea of an object-oriented
program with lots of objects calling
around means that looking from the top of
the call tree down may not be so helpful.
Instead, Scott can switch from showing
the standard way of things,
from a top-down view of the tree,
to an inverted view of the tree.
So rather than looking at how much
memory was allocated in main and below,
we can see how much memory
was allocated via malloc,
and who called malloc,
and how much memory was allocated there.
And we can see here that about 1.3
megabytes of the memory on the heap was
allocated in calls to NS--NXZoneMalloc,
which is one of the wrapper
functions around malloc.
And 904K of that, interestingly,
turns out to have been
allocated in an NSBitmap image.
and of that 904K,
which is about half of the
memory in this program,
all of that was allocated in two classes,
the general graph and the color graph.
Okay, so when Scott and I looked at this,
we said, "Hmm,
this is interesting." It turns out that
those bitmaps are used to draw the image
on the screen of the particles and the
So this is the bitmap that you
actually see drawn on the screen.
And actually,
it turns out that what ends up--the
reason why there's more than one here
is that it turns out that SimPhysics,
in order to be clever about caching,
tried to allocate both
of those data structures,
or both of those bitmaps,
at the launch of the program,
even before we'd chosen
which view we wanted,
whether we wanted the general graph,
which showed the most simple view,
or the color graph,
showing us that nice shaded view.
So we were allocating structures
just in case we needed them.
And as a result,
we're using half of our memory in
memory that we haven't even touched yet,
probably.
So this is bad.
This indicates something
that perhaps we should fix.
Maybe we should only allocate
those when we actually need them.
Okay, Malik Debug has a number
of other features.
One thing that you can do is
you can actually set a mark
by pressing the Mark button,
marking a point in time.
And then you can actually change
from showing all nodes to only
showing the things that have been
created since the mark was pressed.
And this gives you a way to actually
identify all the allocations that
occur during a specific point in time.
And you don't have to do this.
Another mode that mallocdebug has
is the ability to track down leaks.
And so Scott can actually
choose the definite leaks mode.
Show me only the things that
are leaked data structures.
What mallocdebug does here is
it goes scanning through the
memory of the application,
looking for things that
look like pointers.
And for everything that
looks like a pointer,
it tries to decide if that pointer
actually points to a malloc block.
And if so,
it marks that malloc block as reachable.
And then what it does is it shows
us only the things that aren't
And now that it's done it,
let's see what it found.
Well, it finds that we've got about
900K of memory that's leaked.
And it turns out it was both of those
data structures that we noticed.
So not only were we creating them
and then forget--and then--or
creating them just in case,
but we were then losing them.
Because leak detection
is not just saying,
maybe you don't use this.
We don't even have pointers to
these data structures anywhere.
And so there's no way
we could even call free.
So this memory is wasted and it will stay
around until the application finishes.
So by tracking down leaks,
we can actually cut our memory use,
and in this case,
we can cut our memory use by half.
And that's very nice.
Do you want me to show the memory view?
Actually, why don't you do that as well?
Thank you.
You can also take one of
the buffers that you found,
and if you actually
care about the contents,
for example,
you want to understand exactly
what string's being leaked,
you can actually double-click
on something in the lower half,
which represents the actual allocations
at that point in the call tree,
and you can actually get a hex dump
showing you details about that.
Thank you, Scott.
Could we go back to slides?
Okay,
and one last thing I should mention,
malloc-debug is only showing
you the current allocations,
so that as you free things,
those will actually disappear.
A third thing that malloc debug
does that's actually very helpful
is it can help you with debugging,
not just analysis.
For example,
pointer bugs can be particularly nasty.
They tend to be insidious,
they tend to be subtle, they tend to only
happen in certain cases.
And so you end up with cases where
your program just crashes because
suddenly you're trying to access
some variable that's been trashed.
For example,
you may have a case where your
application frees memory but continues
to write to that memory or read from that
memory until whoever now owns the memory
decides to read the value you wrote,
which has corrupted their data,
or writes to those values that
you thought were so interesting.
Another case where you can
have problems with pointer
bugs is if you overrun buffers,
if you write past the end of
an array and keep writing on
to the next data structure,
trashing memory.
Malictabug gives you some ways to
actually track down such problems.
The way that it does it is
that mallocdebug actually
uses its own malloc library,
and it actually turns on
a couple special features.
One of those is that every time
that you free a block of memory,
it overwrites it with a garbage value,
55 hex, so that if a program continues
to access that memory,
hopefully the program will get
garbage values and will crash.
mallocdebug also provides guard words.
It places a special word on each
end of a buffer so that mallocdebug
can actually detect whether that
buffer has been overrun or underrun,
whether you've written before the
beginning of it or after the end.
In mallocdebug itself,
you can track down the overruns and
underruns by looking for trash nodes.
However, the other fix,
or the other trick,
of overwriting free memory will
actually cause applications to
crash when you do stupid things.
And so if your program crashes in
malloc-debug but doesn't crash normally,
you should attach with a debugger and try
to check out what's going on with that,
because it generally means that your
program has a pointer problem that you
should try to track down so that you
can make your program more reliable.
malloc-debug also prints out a
number of warning messages to the
console in an extremely helpful way,
or to the standard output.
So check the standard output
when you're using malloc-debug
for tracking down memory bugs.
Okay,
the second of the tools for analyzing
memory use is called ObjectAlloc.
And ObjectAlloc is interesting because
rather than trying to describe objects
according to where they were allocated,
it tries to allocate or it
tries to determine how many
objects have been allocated.
Because sometimes it's easier
to reason about certain types of
pointer problems by noticing that.
So can we switch back to the demo screen,
please?
So once again, Scott can launch
SimPhysics in ObjectAlloc,
and then he can start it running.
And what you should see here is that, um,
Immediately this graph starts appearing.
What ObjectAlloc is showing us here is,
first of all,
how many objects of each type,
each Objective-C type, currently exist.
That's what the current column is.
It'll also show the peak number
of objects of each type that have
existed during the lifetime of
the program and the total number
of objects that have existed.
And it also shows a histogram to give us
a graphical way to actually detect that,
so that we might be
able to detect trends.
For example, is the number of arrows
increasing over time?
So one question we could easily ask
ourselves in terms of performance is,
are we correctly actually freeing all the
data structures when we close Windows?
So Scott, for example,
could create several SymPhysics Windows.
and then destroy those windows.
Now, for each of those windows,
we had to create several data structures.
And Scott can sort the list by category,
and then we can go and
take a look at a couple.
For example, the camera view,
or the camera.
There should be exactly one camera
and one camera view per window.
So at a peak,
we should have seen six objects,
and currently we should see one.
However, currently, right now,
what we see is six objects of each type.
This implies that as we
were closing those windows,
we were forgetting to actually
free up those data structures.
And so this implies that we actually
have a bug in our cleanup routines.
Object ALEC also has
another neat feature.
If you're a beginning
Objective-C programmer,
you've often probably been
caught by cases where you
release an object too many times.
And on the last release,
when you're not expecting it,
suddenly your program crashes
when you go to look for an
object that doesn't really exist.
Object ALEC also gives you a way
to log each retain and release.
And then you can go
deeper into Object ALEC,
ask about specific objects,
and find every retain and release
that's been done on that object so
that you can try to understand what
the retain count should be and why
an object is being freed before it,
before the end.
Back to the slides, please.
They really like my program.
Could we please go back to these slides?
Thank you.
Okay, so those are memory problems.
The second category of
problems is CPU usage.
So what are the possible problems you
can have where you're executing code?
Well,
one thing you could be doing is you could
be executing code you don't need to.
Well, how do you find that out?
Well, you don't find it out because
performance is invisible.
How do you know that you're actually
executing code you shouldn't?
So this is one of the reasons
you actually need to analyze
what your program's doing.
You may have an algorithm that you
thought was cheap but turns out to be
much more expensive than you thought.
For example, when you actually have the
total of a thousand objects,
it may actually be very inefficient
compared to a hundred objects.
You may have code that you--
or an API that you were calling
that you thought should be cheap,
but turns out to be extremely expensive.
You can't actually detect
that unless you measure.
And finally,
you might be doing things like polling,
constantly asking the mouse, "Hey,
what's your position?
What's your position?
What's your position?" Instead of waiting
for the operating system to actually
tell you that the mouse has moved,
cutting the amount of effort you do.
In general, with CPU usage,
you want to do the law
of diminishing returns.
You want to go after the functions
that are the most expensive,
because those are the ones that if
you can even--that improving their
performance will make the biggest
difference on your application.
So to find those hotspots,
find those bits of code that
are extremely expensive,
you need to use a tool called Sampler.
Sampler is a tool that allows you to
stop the program while it's executing,
find out where in the
code it's executing,
and then continues.
Can we switch over to the demo slides?
Scott can launch Sampler here.
And we'll again go with SymPhysics.
What Sampler does is it's sampling.
It stops the program every, say,
20 milliseconds or 50 milliseconds,
finds the code that's executing,
and then lets the program continue.
And it actually sums up that data.
In this case, Scott can take a look at a
specific part of the program,
specifically the drawing
in that vector graph,
which we found was extremely slow.
So what he can do is press
Start Sampling for the app,
do some drag so we can find
out what's going on in that
And then he can press Stop Sampling.
And Sampler again gives us a
call tree representation of
the code that was executing.
In this case,
the numbers to the left of the functions,
rather than being the amount of memory,
represents how often that
code was found executing.
The 500 represents 500 samples.
500 times the program was stopped,
the program was in main.
Scott can also switch it to seconds,
which should be a little more
helpful because that's a unit that
we actually care about as humans.
And we can see here that we
sampled for about 10 seconds,
and there were two threads
that we found executing.
Let's look at that second one, Scott.
When we find out that that first
thread pretty much was spending
all of its time--actually,
click down a couple layers.
During all ten seconds that we
were looking at this application,
we found that the program was
running in this Mach message trap.
Now, it could be that it was actually
calling that several times,
but odds are what was happening was
it was sitting there waiting for a
message and just never came back.
So the second thread probably
was doing no execution.
So as a result,
we just want to pull that out of
the graph because we don't care.
Scott can press the
Now we get to the main thread.
And we can see here that we
spent about ten seconds of time.
Most of the time was,
and the information on the left,
excuse me, on the right actually
shows a sample call stack,
so we get some idea of
what code was executing.
And we can see here that all
ten seconds we were in main.
That's not surprising.
But the
Pretty much all the time
we were in CF Run/Loop/Run,
which turns out to be one of
the APIs for doing run loops.
and of that time,
about three seconds of the
time was in Mach message,
which is one of the kernel routines
for doing inter-process communication.
This is probably when the
application was asking,
"Hey, has anything happened?"
has the mouse move.
And so pretty much this was causing,
this was when the
application was just sitting.
So we can prune that out as well.
The remaining seven seconds,
we were down in CFRunLoop in
some of the code for actually
handling window displays.
And Scott can go up that.
And we can see that we
were in NSView draw rec,
so we were actually drawing the
rectangle that represents the view.
And all that code was in the camera view,
which is actually in the
code that is SimPhysics.
And we find, of the six seconds that we
spent drawing that view,
5.88 seconds of that was drawing vectors,
that is, drawing those arrows.
Hmm, that's interesting.
Ninety-nine percent of our
time we were drawing arrows.
And of that 99 percent of the
time that we were drawing arrows,
three seconds of the
time we were in arrow,
draw arrow for vector,
and then we were in a
number of other functions.
So this tells us that the
reason why we were having so
much trouble dragging that,
dragging that particle around
was that drawing the arrows
was extremely expensive.
And there's a few reasons for this.
If we actually click down,
you can see here that some of
the time was actually spent
in the NSBezierPath class.
That's the AppKit class that
you use for just general
string--or general line drawing.
The reason why is because the arrows
are actually a little more complex.
Not only are they just straight lines,
but there's also a curved
part for the arrowhead.
We also fill in the arrow
to make the nice arrowheads.
And as a result,
drawing those arrows tends
to be relatively expensive.
So one thing we could do to improve
this is we could actually try to
simplify the drawing of the arrow.
We could try to draw fewer arrows
by spacing them out further.
Or we could actually try to find
the cases where we're drawing,
let's say, very small arrows.
Where we don't really care about having
all that detail and instead just draw
a little line showing which direction.
So with this information from Sampler,
we can get several ideas about how
we should improve the algorithm to
try to make the screen redraw faster.
Thank you.
Can we go back to slides?
Okay.
The third category that we can
look at is use of resources.
And I can think of at
least two cases of that.
One is that we can go for
resources such as devices.
For example, are we accessing the disk
incorrectly or accessing files?
This can be particularly nasty
because when you go out to get a file,
such as a preference file, let's say,
you can't actually guarantee
it's on a local machine anymore.
It might be on somebody's iPod.
It could be out on the
network on somebody's iDisk.
And so getting files could
be extremely expensive.
And so--and unless you actually
know which accesses you're doing,
you might not have a
way to track that down.
The second case of resource
use is that your application
may not be just your code.
There are other parts of the
system that are involved with
getting your application to run.
Two examples of that.
One of those is the ATS server.
So in order to actually render fonts,
to create the fonts,
your application actually talks
with a separate process called the
ATS server to actually do that work.
When you're doing drawing,
the Windows server's actually
responsible for doing your drawing.
You actually send messages to it
and it actually does the work.
And so when you actually
look at your program on top,
you need to look at
those processes as well,
because your application may
only take 50 percent of the CPU,
but if the Windows server's taking
the other 50 percent of the CPU,
you may have a problem in your code.
So to track down--I'll tell you
about one of those in particular.
How do we track down information
about how we're using the disk?
For example,
let's imagine that we did something in
SimPhysics to load values on startup.
And we noticed that loading all the
information off of disk tends to be slow.
One way that we can track that down
to decide if that's a disk problem is
we can use a utility called fsusage.
This is a command-line tool.
What you do with fsusage is you need
to run it as root and name a process,
and it will actually give you a
running total of all the file system
accesses done by that process.
So it'll actually say you did a read,
you did a write,
here are what the parameters are,
here's how long it took,
here's whether it was blocking.
And with that information,
you should be able to tell which
files you're opening and how long
it was taking to access those files.
Once you've done that,
there's actually another mode of
sampler that will actually help
you track down exactly where in
your code you were calling that.
Because you don't actually
get the full call-- you don't
actually know where you called it.
What you can do with samplers,
there's a mode that says
look at file system accesses.
And every time that you call open, read,
write, et cetera,
the sampler will automatically get
the backtrace to that call from
your code so that you can find out
where in your code you might be
calling open and how many times.
The second case of resources is,
could we be drawing too much?
And how do we actually track that down?
Now,
drawing is particularly nasty because
it affects performance in so many ways.
When you're deciding to draw,
you end up using CPU time,
you end up using memory time,
you're dealing with devices,
and as a result,
it can be extremely costly.
Even just having Windows that are
off-screen requires the Windows server
to allocate memory for those.
And so you're increasing
your application's memory
use by having the Windows.
So how do you actually track
down how you're doing drawing?
Drawing is kind of hard,
because although you can see
some of what's actually changing,
you don't actually know
what's being redrawn.
And luckily there's a tool that can help.
Can we go to the demo machine again?
The tool provided by the Core Graphics
team is called Quartz Debug.
And Scott here can turn on an option in
Quartz Debug called Flash Screen Updates
Yellow and then can do some actions.
Here we see, as Scott moves the window,
we can see that the window server needs
to actually redraw the area around the
window and parts of the window title,
I believe.
So redrawing a window, moving it around,
is relatively cheap.
Now if Scott tries to resize that window,
We can see that when we
actually resize the window,
SimPhysics is constantly redrawing
the contents of that window to
make up for the size change.
So this shows one of the
issues that you need to worry
about with your application.
You may not have realized how much work
was being done when resizing a window,
but Quartz Debug makes it obvious.
It makes the invisible visible.
And in this case,
perhaps some physics should be a little
more clever about how it does redraws.
For example,
maybe it shouldn't automatically try
to relay out the entire window every
time that it gets a change event saying
that the window size has changed.
We can also find out how much
memory we're using for Windows by
pressing the Show Window List button.
And here we get a running total
according to each application
of which Windows exist and
how much memory they're using.
In this case, we'll actually see several
Windows for the SimPhysics,
even though we only have
one main window open,
because there are other
things that count as Windows,
such as the icon in the dock,
such as the menu bar, and so on.
Thank you.
Can we switch back to slides?
Okay.
So those are the three major
categories of performance problems.
And so we can ask ourselves,
after looking at that and looking
at some particular problems,
what would happen if we
actually fixed those?
And luckily Scott actually did that.
Thank you, Scott.
Yeah.
One clarification.
It looks like I made things
worse for the plane case.
I'll explain it.
Thank you.
So...
So what we've done here is we
actually measured before and after.
And the before case is actually kind
of interesting on the plain view.
One of the things that we noticed
as we were actually redraw--as we
were optimizing this is that we
were getting these insanely high
frame rates when we were actually
moving around with the plain view.
In this case, we saw 35 frames a second.
On a faster machine,
we saw much more than that.
And because we're not playing Quake,
we really don't care
about high frame rates.
And so, as a result,
there's probably no reason to
actually redraw at 35 frames
a second for this program.
So instead,
we throttled it down and we made
it so that the plain view was
only going at 20 frames a second.
So we weren't saturating the CPU,
but we were still giving enough of a
frame rate change so that you actually
got the feeling of direct manipulation.
For the case of the vector graph,
the intensity arrows, though,
we went from a case where we were
doing about two frames a second.
according to the
measurements we were doing,
up to about 15 frames a second.
And that was because we changed
how we were drawing arrows,
changed to drawing only little lines
when we were doing small arrows,
and so on.
For doing that intensive--or
the color graph,
we ended up going from about
2 frames a second to 7.
And by getting rid of those
memory leaks that we found,
we ended up--and by getting rid of
several other data structures that
were a result of porting from Java to
Cocoa in a relatively simple way,
we managed to cut the memory use
of the application from about 2.5
megabytes before to 1.1 megabytes after.
So if we could do this with only a
few hours of looking at Scott's app,
imagine what you could
do with your application.
Now, I didn't go through
all the possible tools.
Here are some of the others
that you may want to look at.
For looking at the heap,
there's three command-line
tools that may be interesting.
Heap, leaks, and malloc history.
All of these have man pages.
Go check them out.
For looking at process state,
there's a program called Sample,
which is like Sampler,
except it works on a command
line and puts out a text file
describing what it found running.
This is really good when
your application hangs.
You can go to a terminal, type sample,
process ID or process name,
ten seconds of sampling,
sampling every ten milliseconds,
and get a report like that.
You can also,
if you're doing command-line tools,
use all the Unix tools that you may be
used to for doing performance analysis,
such as Time, where you can say Time and
give it a command line,
and it will tell you how long it
took to actually get that task to
For understanding resources,
we have tools such as IOSTAT.
This actually was not working on 10.1,
but works on JAGUAR.
And this will actually tell you how
many file system accesses you're
doing and that sort of thing.
Okay, the tools that I have shown you
so far will work on any binary.
You may need to launch them
inside the tool for them to work,
but in general they
will work on anything.
You don't need to recompile them.
You don't need to include some
special debugging library.
It just works.
And this makes it very easy to
get their performance information.
You have no excuses.
If you're doing development
with CFM or with Code Warrior,
how many people are doing that?
Okay, so for all of you,
make sure that when you compile
your applications in Code Warrior,
that you turn on the option that
says that you want to compile your
app with in-line traceback tables.
If you do this,
then all the performance tools can
actually get your symbolic data out
and can tell which of your functions
was found executing or was found at the
bottom of a malloc stack or whatever.
If you are using Code Warrior's
version of the standard library,
make sure to compile it with the
option set so that you use the
systems version of malloc rather
than MetroWorks' version of malloc.
In that way, you can actually use malloc
debug to analyze stack accesses.
Otherwise,
we never actually see all the accesses.
There are a number of sources for
documentation about these tools.
First of all,
they were all in the Developer Tools CD,
so you can go off and use them.
The documentation for the
command-line tools is in man pages.
The documentation for the graphical
tools is within the applications
themselves in a help menu.
There's also a release notes document in
each Developer Tools release so that you
can find out about the latest changes.
There's also two books you should look
at if you're interested in performance.
The first is the
Inside MacOSX Performance Book,
which will tell you about the tools and
give you some details about understanding
how the MacOSX operating system works.
The second book, the System Overview,
will give you lots of just
sort of general details about
MacOSX and its architecture.
So in conclusion,
you want to tune your app
to make the best impression,
so go and do it.
Most of the problems that you're
going to encounter are going
to be a side effect of memory,
just because of the way that
systems using virtual memory work.
So make sure to cut your
memory use in all its ways,
whether that's the memory
that you allocate via malloc,
whether it's the amount of code that
you're actually touching and executing,
whether it's the amount
of drawing you're doing.
Make sure that you actually
can compare performance,
so you can actually figure out
if you're making a difference.
Find some metric to measure,
measure that on every build,
and compare your results
across every build.
And remember that your application
is not just your application,
but you also need to watch the other
applications that might help it,
and you also need to find out if your
application behaves well on a system
that has lots of other things running.
And go out there and create
some great MacOSX apps.
Now, if you have used all these tools,
and you've gotten all the
information you can out of Sampler,
the question is where you go from there.
And what I'd like to do at this point
is bring on Eric Miller from the
Performance and Architecture Group in
Hardware to tell us about the
Computer Hardware Understanding Tools to
find out how you can get information
from the performance registers
to further tune your code.
Thank you.
Is this on?
Thanks, Robert.
Good luck.
That's a lot of stuff to memorize.
So, Computer Hardware
Understanding Development Tools,
we like to call them CHUD tools.
There's just a couple things
we want to go through.
So, well,
first I want to kind of tell you
what you can do with our tools.
You can find out what's going on with
the hardware through the CHUD libraries.
You can find critical code
segments with the tools we supply,
and once you've found
those critical code areas,
you can then use other tools that
we supply to help you find the
right way to tune those segments.
And then also,
the CHUD tools are system-wide
tools where you saw a sampler
sampling a particular process.
The CHUD tools can do both a
single process and they can
also sample the entire system.
So you can see if you have issues in
your code or perhaps you're limited
by some system facility or some
other application using resources.
So, in order to find out what
the hardware is doing,
the engineers at Apple and our processor
suppliers like Motorola kindly provide
us with performance monitor counters
built right into the processors and
built into the memory controller.
So what we do with the Chud tools
is provide a mechanism to access
all that information and bring it
to you in a human-readable format.
So you can basically count what's
called a performance monitor events.
Events like instructions completed.
So every time an instruction completes,
one of the performance counters
will count one or three
if you set it up to do so.
If there's cache misses,
you can count the number
of misses that occur.
And these can be combined in different
ways to tell you statistics about the
system at the very hardware level.
So in effect,
you can read your system directly.
You don't have to worry about guessing
or having a model or a simulation.
You can use your own system.
So the Chud tools provide an overall
framework and some tools that bring this
all together and make it a bit simpler.
Otherwise, you'd have to write your
own tools from scratch,
a lot of assembly language,
and calling out to
other kinds of systems.
That might be difficult.
One of the tools we don't really
have time to demonstrate is Monster.
Monster is a very straightforward way
to access the performance counters.
So you're going to be able to collect
data from the counters in several ways.
One of the things that Chud
Tools provides throughout all of
our tools is a hot key facility,
which is part of Cocoa in
the core foundation.
We wrap it up in Chud so that you
can access it through your tools when
they're not -- they don't have to
have a focus in order to start and
stop the collection of information.
You can also use a timed interval
mechanism that we have in the CHUD tools.
We have it down to approximately
100 microseconds level.
You can take a sample over time
from the performance monitor system.
You can also measure event counts
in relation to other event counts
and create histograms with Monster.
If you're computing performance
metrics with Monster,
like Memoryband would say,
you can collect a number of bytes
being transferred on the memory bus.
Then you can also collect
these samples over time.
And then you can compute bytes over time,
bytes per second per say.
If you collect cycles per instruction
by collecting cycles on one counter,
instructions on another,
and do the math between them.
Monster has a very strong
capability to do this.
It has a built-in calculator
that lets you create your own,
what we call shortcuts.
These are not too hard to do.
I'll just go through a
couple of slides on it.
So what's going on here on this
slide is that Monster has been
set up to count a number of things
on the performance counters.
In orange, you can see in the left column
that we have the third and fourth
performance monitor counter.
Our measuring floating point unit
instructions and instructions completed.
And then below the listing of PMCs,
you see a section that says shortcuts.
These are calculations that will be
performed on the performance monitor
counts after they're collected over time.
So the second part of the screen
on the right shows a single
run with lots of intervals,
perhaps 10 millisecond samples.
In these intervals,
you can see that the third and fourth
column are highlighted in orange.
So we've collected the various floating
point unit instruction counts and the
overall instructions completed in counts.
You can see about the sixth
sample that it starts to count.
It starts to kind of regularize.
We have 2 million, 7 million,
8 million FPU counts.
Again, 23 million, 35 million,
36 million overall
instructions completed.
So then if you were to just slide
over there to the rest of the...
[Transcript missing]
So, I don't have too much
to say about Monster,
except, oh yeah,
you can graph the things that
you plot by selecting columns.
So what I did was the percent
floating point instructions are
selected so you can see the little
graph over time of the percentage,
how it varied.
So you can see there was some
work done for a few samples,
and then a drop in the
amount of work and back up,
draw a little drop,
back up every four or five intervals.
At this time,
I want to bring up my colleague,
Nathan Slingerland,
so we can do a live demo of one
of our other tools called Shikari.
Thank you, Eric.
So, actually,
can we go back to the slide for a second?
Talk a little bit about it first.
Okay, so Shikari is a
system-wide profiling tool.
It's similar in purpose to Sampler,
except that besides time,
you can sample on any of the performance
events for those performance monitor
counters that Eric was talking about.
So this lets you correlate these
events to your source code.
So if you want to know where
cache misses are coming from
or alignment exceptions or,
you know, instruction counts,
any of those things,
you can find that out.
And then using Shikari,
you can get an annotated
list of any function,
and it'll tell you exactly how
many cache misses come from
that piece of source code.
So, yeah,
let's switch over to the demo machine.
It's probably the best way to
see exactly how this is used.
So in order to demonstrate Shikari
and also to show you how you can solve
a real performance problem with it,
we're going to look at Flurry.
That's a colorful, open source,
OpenGL screensaver by Calum Robinson.
That's what it does.
So unless you look at
this with a sampling tool,
you don't really know what's
going on in the system.
So because it is a screensaver
and because it's OpenGL,
we might be processor-bound,
we might be graphics card-bound,
we don't know.
So in order to see what's going on,
let's bring up Shikari.
So what we see here,
this is the main Shikari window.
And this list, this table,
when you sample,
is going to give you a profile
listing from most frequently seen to
least frequently seen function names.
And we also have built in a bunch of
very useful sampling configurations.
You're free to create your own.
There's a facility in here to do that.
But in the most basic way,
we just want to see a
time profile at first.
And, you know,
that's really the mantra of
performance optimization is profile,
profile, and profile again.
You want to see,
you want to keep seeing how,
when you change your code,
what really is happening to,
in the system each time.
So because the Shikari also
uses the hotkey facility
that Eric mentioned before,
it doesn't have to be in the foreground.
It can sit in the background.
And that works well for a full system.
screen app.
So he's going to use the hot key.
And actually, the sampling itself is
pretty low overhead.
It's only when it starts looking
at symbols and everything that it
actually starts to get in the way.
So what's interesting here,
we see that square root,
system square root,
is taking up 40% of the time.
And that's in the whole system, right?
If we actually -- we see that
flurry is 99% of the system,
and we saw the other half was .8% there,
our other piece.
So 50% -- or 40% of the
time in square root.
Now, MacOSX now comes with a very fast
and very precise square root routine.
But -- so it's IEEE 754 compliant
and 53 bits of precision.
And that's great,
except this is a screen saver.
So we might be able to get away
with a little less precision there.
So if -- let's take a look at the source.
So this is the original source code.
We can see that we have
a little bit of a delay.
We're -- we got a division there
and a square root based on that
result -- or a square root,
and then we're dividing with that.
But --
What this actually is is a very
good opportunity to use the
floating-point reciprocal square-root
estimate instruction that's
available on any G3 or G4 processor.
So there we are, in-line assembly.
Now, I should emphasize that this is not
always appropriate for your code,
and usually you probably want
the full result for square root.
But in our case, this is approximately
five bits of precision,
and it turns out to be plenty.
It's, you know, visually,
that's all we care about.
It looks great.
So let's see how long it takes.
Oh, I should tell you exactly
what our metric is here.
So it took 12 seconds,
and we're measuring how long
it takes to render 500 frames.
And we've modified the original flurry
a little bit so that it's deterministic,
and every time you get the same type
of pattern on the screen and like that.
So let's hit Go here.
We'll see how long that takes.
Six seconds.
So that's a 2x speedup, right?
So not bad.
Now, okay, so we want to profile again.
We want to see where we're
actually spending time now.
And this is an iterative process.
You keep just banging on it with your
profiling tool to see what's happening.
And we expect not to see
square root in there.
Sure enough, it's not there.
So now our functions inside of Flurry,
updateSmoke and drawSmoke, are up.
So because we know that Update Smoke and
Draw Smoke are floating-point intensive,
we can use another one
of Shikari's features,
and that is to tell us
where floating-point issue
stalls are coming from.
And that's just another
configuration here.
Run the demo again.
And it's the same thing.
So you start with a hotkey.
So, like we might expect,
Update Smoke has the majority of
the floating-point issue stalls.
And what Chikari will let you do is
drill down inside of that function
and see the disassembly of it.
And besides that,
it's going to visually show
you where your hotspots are.
In this case, a hotspot will be orange,
and the colder spots,
which weren't sampled, will be blue.
So this is statistical sampling,
so you're not going to see an
exact execution sequence here.
So if we go down here near the bottom,
we see, wow,
Floating point move register.
Yeah, it's dependent on that floating
point reciprocal estimate.
Yeah, okay.
So most of the floating point
issues still stem from there.
So let's go see what is that.
If we can bring it back.
Shikari, you gonna... Shikari back.
It's line 279 in the source code.
So now we can go back to the source.
So that's this loop right here.
And so what can we do with this?
This is a scalar floating-point loop.
One thing we might do is
use software pipelining,
or if you attended the AltaVec session,
it's called data injection.
And that is unroll the loop.
Give the processor more to do
that's not dependent on results,
so you're not serially dependent there.
Or maybe we'd like to vectorize it.
It turns out that this
algorithm is quite vectorizable.
So what we did is we did both.
We unrolled and we vectorized.
Here we are.
That's the new source code.
So let's bring up Shikari
and ask it where--well,
let's actually see Flurry first.
Let's see how fast it is now.
Okay, so three and a half seconds.
So, not bad.
Almost another 2x speedup.
So, again,
maybe we could make Flurry even faster,
right?
Maybe we would want to look at,
there's an Altevec issue stalls preset.
Or maybe we want to try
multi-threading this.
I mean,
if we have a dual processor machine,
we might be able to take advantage
of that second processor.
But before we go forth and go do all the,
invest in all that work,
let's take another time profile
during the Altevec rendering.
Okay, whoa.
Driver.
Can't do a lot about that.
So the driver is actually dominating.
I mean,
it's taking about a third of the time.
Our code is still important,
but it's less so now, right?
So the better the job
you do at optimization,
the less you're going to see
that show up in the profile.
But it turns out,
maybe now it's time to review how
we actually implemented Flurry.
Actually, we didn't.
Kalem Robinson did.
But, you know,
it'd be time to go back and look at that.
Because we've talked with
our colleagues in OpenGL,
and they've told us, yeah,
probably there are better
ways to render this,
to be drawing this as is done right here.
So, you know,
you'd go and try and fix how you're
interacting with OpenGL instead.
So at this time,
could we go back to the slides?
Just to give you a taste
of what Shikari can do.
And of course,
you can use any of the performance
events that are available on the
memory controller or the CPU.
So underlying Monster and underlying
Shikari are the Chet framework.
And this allows you to write
your own performance tools.
All the functionality is there.
We're not hiding anything
from you from what we use.
You can access the
performance monitor counters,
special purpose registers on the chip,
collect information about the hardware.
It's not that you couldn't
do this on your own.
It's just the framework tries to
consolidate this into an easy-to-use,
simple C API.
And--or the other thing you can
do is to instrument your code.
Like, if you know you have
an important function,
or a sampler or a shikari tells
you you have an important function,
and you really just want to know how
many cache misses are inside of this
function or something like that,
you can put chud calls inside of there.
There's also a remote facility
that'll allow you to start
and stop an application like
Monster from within your application.
So you can just capture a small
bit of what you're interested in.
So here's an example of that,
just to see.
So call chat initialize.
Everybody has to do that
when they use the framework.
Get some information about the processor
and the bus frequency and like that.
And then next comes the
more important part.
We're gonna set up the counters.
We tell it what event
we want and which PMC.
So these are on the CPU.
Clear the counters, start the counters,
and then do what you're interested in,
right?
So that's where--whatever
you're interested in is there.
Stop the counters right after that.
And then have some kind of reporting
function that's going to list out
what was in the PMCs over time.
Okay, in the Chud Tools package,
there are also a few other useful tools,
especially if you're
doing things like Altevec.
There's Amber,
which is an instruction tracer.
It's going to record the exact
sequence of instructions that
your program goes through.
ACID, or SIMG4,
takes the output of Amber,
and that we have a,
it's a G4 or 7400 simulator.
Or ACID can give you
information about the,
like a newer processor like the 7450.
It's not a simulator, though,
but it can tell you about
dependency stalls and how,
you know, different kinds of latencies.
And then Reggie is a tool to look at
and modify special purpose registers.
So where to get it?
This is the website where you can
download the Chud Tools package.
I should tell you right now
that the package that's up
there on the FTP site there,
the package that's on the FTP site
right now will not run in Jaguar.
It won't hurt Jaguar,
but the tools won't work.
But you can expect within the
next few days to see a package.
You want the Chud 200 beta package.
There's a beta up there right now.
And that has a lot of features
that have been added very recently.
And like I said,
you can expect to see a version you can
use with your new Jaguar CDs very soon.
And any issues you can report
to Chud Tools feedback.
So at this time,
I'm going to-- let's bring
Godfrey DiGiorgi back up to
run-- to have a few more slides.
Thank you, Nathan.
And a big hand for our presenters.
I think they've done
a fantastic job today.
So more information.
I listed out the two
manuals that are available.
They're both available on your disk in
PDF format in the Developer Documentation
Essentials Directory.
You can also order them from our website.
If you go to the TechPubs
website listed above,
you can go to our supplier
for print-on-demand.
We, of course,
have the Connection Tools page
and a link to the bug reporter.
So if you find problems
with any of the tools,
we want to hear that feedback.
We want to hear the bugs
and see them in our system.
[Transcript missing]